=====================================
Observability — metrics and traces
=====================================

AutoControl exposes a Prometheus-compatible ``/metrics`` endpoint and an
OpenTelemetry-style tracer for every action. Out of the box you get:

- Per-action call counts and latency histograms.
- Per-agent-step counters partitioned by tool name and outcome.
- Span trees around the executor, the agent loop, and any user code
  wrapped with the :func:`traced` decorator.

The metric primitives are stdlib-only, so you do not need
``prometheus_client`` installed. If you do install it later — or
``opentelemetry-api`` for traces — AutoControl picks them up
automatically.

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

Quick start
===========

Start the bundled HTTP exporter and point a scraper at it::

   from je_auto_control import default_metrics_exporter

   exporter = default_metrics_exporter()  # binds 127.0.0.1:9090
   exporter.start()

Then in another process::

   $ curl http://127.0.0.1:9090/metrics
   # HELP autocontrol_action_calls_total Number of AC_* actions executed
   # TYPE autocontrol_action_calls_total counter
   autocontrol_action_calls_total{action="AC_screenshot",outcome="ok"} 42
   ...

Drop the URL into a Prometheus scrape config and you have a Grafana
dashboard.

Built-in metrics
================

The executor and agent loop emit these automatically — you do **not**
need to instrument anything yourself:

================================================  =========  =======================================
Metric                                            Type       Labels
================================================  =========  =======================================
``autocontrol_action_calls_total``                Counter    ``action``, ``outcome`` (``ok``/``error``)
``autocontrol_action_duration_seconds``           Histogram  ``action``
``autocontrol_agent_runs_total``                  Counter    *(none)*
``autocontrol_agent_steps_total``                 Counter    ``tool``, ``outcome``
``autocontrol_agent_outcomes_total``              Counter    ``outcome`` (``succeeded``/``failed``)
================================================  =========  =======================================

The histogram uses Prometheus' default bucket layout (5 ms → 10 s), which
covers everything from a synchronous keystroke to a slow OCR pass.

Adding your own metrics
=======================

Same primitives are exposed through the package facade::

   from je_auto_control import (
       MetricCounter, MetricGauge, MetricHistogram, default_metric_registry,
   )

   registry = default_metric_registry()
   widgets_built = registry.register(MetricCounter(
       "myapp_widgets_built_total",
       "Count of widgets generated by my pipeline.",
       label_names=("kind",),
   ))

   widgets_built.inc(labels={"kind": "blue"})

Names follow Prometheus rules: snake_case, no dashes, must start with a
letter or underscore. The registry rejects collisions so a typo can't
silently fork a series.

Tracing
=======

The :func:`traced` decorator wraps any callable in a span. The default
tracer is a no-op until ``opentelemetry-api`` is installed — when it is,
your spans flow through whatever exporter you have configured
(OTLP, Jaeger, etc.) without changing your call sites::

   from je_auto_control import traced

   @traced("my_pipeline.process_one")
   def process_one(item):
       ...

For manual span control::

   from je_auto_control import default_tracer

   tracer = default_tracer()
   with tracer.start_as_current_span("crop_and_ocr") as span:
       span.set_attribute("region", "header")
       ...

Production deployment
=====================

Recommended setup for a multi-host AutoControl daemon fleet:

1. Each host calls ``default_metrics_exporter().start()`` on boot.
2. Prometheus scrapes ``host:9090/metrics`` every 15 s.
3. ``opentelemetry-api`` + ``opentelemetry-sdk`` + an OTLP exporter
   are installed for the tracing backend (Datadog / Honeycomb / Jaeger).
4. Grafana dashboard alerts on:

   - ``rate(autocontrol_action_calls_total{outcome="error"}[5m]) > 0.1``
   - ``histogram_quantile(0.99, rate(autocontrol_action_duration_seconds_bucket[5m])) > 2.0``
   - ``up{job="autocontrol"} == 0``

The exporter binds to ``127.0.0.1`` by default. To expose it to a
scraper on another host, pass ``host="0.0.0.0"`` *and* put it behind a
firewall or auth proxy — there is no authentication on ``/metrics``.

Security note
=============

Metrics include action names but no payload data, so leaking ``/metrics``
to an external scraper is low-risk on its own. Trace spans may carry the
first 120 chars of agent goals and tool arguments — review your
:func:`traced` call sites before sending traces to a third-party SaaS.
